.. _overview: 

Overview
======== 

GeoServer is a open source software server written in Java that allows 
users to share and edit geospatial data. Designed for interoperability, 
it publishes data from any major spatial data source using open 
standards. 

Being a community-driven project, GeoServer is developed, tested, and 
supported by a diverse group of individuals and organizations from 
around the world. 

GeoServer is the reference implementation of the `Open Geospatial 
Consortium <http://www.opengeospatial.org>`_ (OGC) `Web Feature Service 
<http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/wfs>`_ (WFS) and `Web Map 
Service <http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/wms>`_ (WMS) standards. 
GeoServer forms a core component of the Geospatial Web. 

History
------- 

GeoServer was started in 2001 by `The Open Planning Project 
<http://www.openplanningproject.org>`_ (TOPP), a non-profit technology 
incubator based in New York. TOPP was creating a suite a tools to enable 
open democracy and to help make government more transparent. The first 
of these was GeoServer, which came out of a recognition that a suite of 
tools to enable citizen involvement in government and urban planning 
would be greatly enhanced by the ability to share spatial data. 

The GeoServer founders envisioned a Geospatial Web, analogous to the 
World Wide Web. With the World Wide Web, one can search for and download 
text. With the Geospatial Web, one can search for and download spatial 
data. Data providers would be able to publish their data straight to 
this web, and users could directly access it, as opposed to the now 
indirect and cumbersome methods of sharing data that exist today. 

Those involved with GeoServer founded the `Geotools 
<http://geotools.org>`_ project, an open source GIS Java toolkit. 
Through Geotools, support for Shapefiles, Oracle databases, ArcSDE 
integration, and much more was added. 

Around the same time as GeoServer was founded, The OpenGIS Consortium 
(now the `Open Geospatial Consortium <http://www.opengeospatial.org>`_) 
was working on the Web Feature Service standard. It specifies a protocol 
to make spatial data directly available on the web, using GML 
(Geographic Markup Language), an interoperable data format. A Web Map 
Service was also created, a protocol for creating and displaying map 
images created from spatial data. 

Other projects became interrelated. `Refractions Research 
<http://www.refractions.net>`_ created PostGIS, a free and open spatial 
database, which enabled GeoServer to connect to a free database. Also, 
`MetaCarta <http://metacarta.com>`_ created `OpenLayers 
<http://openlayers.org>`_, an open source browser-based map viewing 
utility. Together, these tools are all have enhanced the functionality 
of GeoServer. 

GeoServer can now output data to many other spatial data viewers, such 
as Google Earth, a popular 3-D virtual globe. In addition, GeoServer is 
currently working directly with Google in order to allow GeoServer data 
to be searchable on Google Maps. Soon a search for spatial data will be 
as easy as a Google search for a web page. Thus GeoServer is continuing 
on its mission to make spatial data more accessible to all. 

License
-------

GeoServer is licensed under the `GNU General Public License 
<http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>`_.